---
title: Google Summer of Code 2013
layout: code
unique_id: codepage
tab: code
author: Stef Epardaud
---
# #{page.title}

This year we are going to participate in the [Google Summer of Code](https://google-melange.appspot.com/gsoc/homepage/google/gsoc2013) 
under the JBoss Community organisation. You can find out [more information](https://community.jboss.org/wiki/GSOC13Ideas)
about the JBoss Community proposals for Google Summer of Code 2013.

If you're a student and would like
to participate in the Ceylon project in a way that will really matter for our users, then here are some of the ideas we're proposing:

## General

### Make Ceylon scriptable

We want to make it possible to write scripts in Ceylon, which means:

- extending our grammar to allow Ceylon statements to appear at the toplevel in a script file (as opposed as within a method/class)
- allowing module imports inside the script file
- supporting the traditional UNIX `#!/usr/bin/ceylon script` header (mostly by ignoring/validating it in the grammar)
- writing the `script` Ceylon command-line plugin, which will compile and run the Ceylon script
- adding all required unit tests
- documenting all this
 
_Knowledge prerequisite_: Ceylon, Java, AntLR
 
_Skill level_: Medium
 
_Mentor_: Stéphane Épardaud, Tako Schotanus, Tom Bentley
 
_Notes_: Refer to the [Ceylon specification issue on scriptability](https://github.com/ceylon/ceylon-spec/issues/200) for more information

## Tools

### Make a Ceylon command-line plugin which generates architecture-dependent installable archives

We'd like to be able to generate installable RPM, Debian archives for a given Ceylon module and version. Similarly we'd like to
be able to export a Ceylon module to a Maven repository, with POM file, and generate Brew descriptors and ZIP archives. For all
formats that support it, we are going to list the dependencies. This involves writing a new Ceylon command-line plugin called `export`.

_Knowledge prerequisite_: Ceylon, Java, RPM, Deb formats
 
_Skill level_: Medium
 
_Mentor_: Stéphane Épardaud, Tako Schotanus, Tom Bentley
 
### Improve Herd, our Ceylon module repository web application

We have many improvements we'd like to bring to [Herd](http://modules.ceylon-lang.org), our Ceylon module repository web application, 
such as features, bug fixes, improving
usability or layout. This will involve all the usual skills required of web developers (front/back) and will make a big difference for
all our users.
 
_Knowledge prerequisite_: HTML 5, CSS 3, JavaScript, Play! Framework 1, Java, PostgreSQL, REST
 
_Skill level_: Medium
 
_Mentor_: Stéphane Épardaud, Tomáš Hradec
 
_Notes_: Refer to the various open [Ceylon Herd issues](https://github.com/ceylon/ceylon-herd/issues?state=open) for more information.

## Ceylon IDE

### Improve the Ceylon IDE debugger

Our [Ceylon IDE](http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/1.0/ide/) debugger (based on the Eclipse IDE) needs some love.
We need to work on the following things:

- Check that our generated debugging line information is correct
- Mask generated artifacts such as temporary variables or extra parameters in the variable view
- Mask generated artifact stack frames
- Visual display of Ceylon values and types in the variable view
- Execute Ceylon code in the interactive panel
- Conditional breakpoints with Ceylon conditions

_Knowledge prerequisite_: Ceylon, Java, Eclipse

_Skill level_: Medium
 
_Mentor_: Stéphane Épardaud, Tomáš Hradec
 
_Notes_: Refer to the various related [Ceylon IDE issues](https://github.com/ceylon/ceylon-ide-eclipse/issues/search?q=debug) for more information.

### Improve the Ceylon IDE

We have many improvements we'd like to bring to our [Ceylon IDE](http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/1.0/ide/), 
such as features, bug fixes, improving usability or layout. This will involve all the usual skills required of GUI desktop applications
and will make a big difference for all our users.

_Knowledge prerequisite_: Ceylon, Java, Eclipse
 
_Skill level_: Medium
 
_Mentor_: Stéphane Épardaud, Tomáš Hradec
 
_Notes_: Refer to the various open [Ceylon IDE issues](https://github.com/ceylon/ceylon-ide-eclipse/issues?state=open) for more information.

### Add support for custom code formatting to the Ceylon IDE

The Ceylon IDE (based on Eclipse) does not currently support global or per-project code formatting rules, like the Java plugin does.
We'd like to support that with the same sort of configuration. This will involve GUI work as well as implementing the formatting
settings in the auto-indent and a new `format` action.

Ideally, outside of the configuration GUI and Eclipse-specific glue, the formatter should be an independent library that can be
reused in a Ceylon command-line `format` plugin as well.

_Knowledge prerequisite_: Ceylon, Java, Eclipse
 
_Skill level_: Medium
 
_Mentor_: Stéphane Épardaud, Tomáš Hradec
 
_Notes_: Refer to the [Ceylon IDE issue](https://github.com/ceylon/ceylon-ide-eclipse/issues/385) for more information.

### Java to Ceylon code converter

The Ceylon IDE (based on Eclipse) should support pasting code from a Java file into a Ceylon file, while tranlating the code to
Ceylon.

Ideally, outside Eclipse-specific glue, the conversion tool should be an independent library that can be
reused in a Ceylon command-line `convert` plugin as well.

_Knowledge prerequisite_: Ceylon, Java, Eclipse, AntLR
 
_Skill level_: Medium
 
_Mentor_: Stéphane Épardaud, Tomáš Hradec
 
_Notes_: Refer to the [Ceylon IDE issue](https://github.com/ceylon/ceylon-ide-eclipse/issues/519) for more information.

## Ceylon compiler

### Optimise Ceylon's implementation of `Callable` functions

Ceylon supports anonymous functions (like JavaScript), as well as obtaining `Callable` references to methods and constructors, which
are currently implemented on the JVM using anonymous inner classes. It should be possible to not require those anonymous classes
for method and constructor references, and use Java 7's new `MethodHandle` API to do the same job with less classes and faster
execution.

This will require testing and validating the ideas and strategy, as well as modifying the Ceylon compiler's JVM backend to support this
change.

_Knowledge prerequisite_: Ceylon, Java
 
_Skill level_: Medium
 
_Mentor_: Stéphane Épardaud, Tako Schotanus, Tom Bentley
 
_Notes_: Refer to the [Ceylon compiler issue](https://github.com/ceylon/ceylon-compiler/issues/557) for more information.