---
title: Improved syntax highlighting and deep linking
author: Tom Bentley
layout: blog
tab: blog
tags: [site]
---

A couple of improvements to the site generation have been added.

### Syntax highlighting

We were previously using literal `<pre>` blocks in markdown pages so that we 
could set the CSS necessary for the syntax highlighter. The *big* downside of 
this was the need to HTML-escape the code within those `<pre>` blocks. Using 
an [awestruct](http://awestruct.org/) 'transformer' it's now possible to use 
the more natural markdown way of including example code 
(i.e. using indentation), which means you don't have to worry about using
HTML entities for <, & etc.

By default `<pre>` blocks will *not* be subject to highlighting. To enable
highlighting simply preceed the block with an HTML comment hinting at the 
language being included. For example

        class Foo() {
            void bar() {
            
            }
        }

It's also easy to have a page with syntax highlighting of multiple 
languages, by using an appropriate hint.

For those who are interested, the way this works is having a transformer 
perform a global `gsub` on the generated output using a suitable regular 
expression to pick out the code blocks generated by markdown.

### Deep linking

Markdown by itself doesn't allow the author to put `id` attributes or anchors
(`<a name="...">`) in the generated HTML, which is annoying if you want to link 
to a particular part of the page. You can of course put `<a name="...">` 
elements in yourself, but:

* It clutters up the nice markdown with HTML.
* It forces you to ensure the uniqueness of the ids you use.
* It's tedious.

Using another transformer we now generate id attributes automatically for all 
`<h*>` and `<p>` elements. For headings we use the heading text (suitably 
munged into an XML NAME). For paragraphs we use the first few words (again 
suitable normalized, and also worrying about uniqueness). If an element 
already has an `id` then it's untouched. If there's a matching `id` 
(or `name`, since they share the same namespace), steps are taken to 
disambiguate the generated one.

The long and the short of this is that we can now easily and accurately link 
into the middle of documents. The *caveat* is that you should be aware that 
changing the first few words of a paragraph (or the text of a heading) is 
likely to break any links which point to it. To prevent such broken links 
you can always use an explicit `<a name="">` at the relevant point.

