---
title: Principles that guide this project
author: Gavin King
layout: blog
unique_id: blogpage
tab: blog
tags:
---

I've been trying to figure out how to explain what it is we're
trying to achieve in the Ceylon language, and where Ceylon has
a somewhat different emphasis to other similar languages. The
following aren't language features as such, rather, they're 
principles that will guide the design of the whole platform.
They're what we think are important in a language meant for
writing large programs in teams.

### Readability

We spend much more time reading other people's code than 
writing our own, so readability is the most important thing in 
a language meant for teams. A programming language is partly 
for communication between _humans_.
Verbosity can sometimes contribute to readability, and it can 
sometimes harm it. Neither verbosity nor brevity is a goal in 
and of itself. What matters is striking a balance that makes 
difficult code understandable. The value of readability 
increases as the size of a team increases.

### Predictability

The programmer should be able to reproduce the reasoning of 
the compiler according to intuitive rules. Errors produced by
the compiler should be understandable to the programmer. 
Therefore, given the complexity of today's modern statically-typed 
languages, it's important to fight really hard to keep the 
number of special cases, corner cases, and interactions between 
intersecting features under control. Too many corner causes 
result in more bugs and, just as bad or worse, more "perceived" 
bugs, from the perspective of the user. Predictability sometimes
means sacrificing potentially useful features that exhibit
unintuitive behavior in the context of the rest of the language.

### Toolability

Most programmers are _much_ more productive with the help of an
IDE, especially when working with libraries or frameworks. And 
so anything that makes code more difficult for tools to 
understand (dynamic typing, XML, template technologies that mix 
multiple languages in a single file, etc) makes us dramatically 
less productive. A statically typed language is a language 
designed for tools. (From this point of view, a command-line 
compiler is just an IDE with a very primitive user interface.)
The value of tooling increases as the size of a program and
its dependencies increases.

### Modularity

If modularity isn't built into the language and its toolset, 
you wind up with a mess of competing module systems that don't 
work together properly and that naturally grow into overcomplex 
monsters because they can't depend upon a simple uniform model.
The value of modularity increases as a software ecosystem grows.

### Metaprogrammability

Metaprogramming is the ability to write code that operates 
upon other code. It's the foundation of sophisticated frameworks 
and libraries. Undisciplined metaprogramming can be harmful, so 
ideally a language would expose facilities for metaprogramming
in a disciplined, typesafe way.

Obviously, these aren't the only criteria we take into account
when we design functionality for Ceylon, but they are things
we're trying to especially emphasize. Of course, there's a 
further overriding value that's more important than any of these: 
Ceylon should be a language that makes it easy to get real work 
done.