---
title: Null and Java interop
author: Gavin King
layout: blog
unique_id: blogpage
tab: blog
tags: [interop]
---

The way Ceylon handles `null` is one of the big attractions of 
the language. Ceylon features a _typed null value_. The object
`null` is just an instance of the perfectly ordinary class 
`Null` from the point of view of the type system. But when the 
compiler backend transforms Ceylon code to Java bytecode or
JavaScript, the class `Null` is eliminated and the value `null`
is represented as a native Java or JavaScript `null` at the 
virtual machine level.

This is great for interoperation with native Java or JavaScript. 
However, when designing our Java interop, we had to take into
account that Java's `null` _isn't_ typed, and that the 
information about whether a Java method might return `null`,
or whether a parameter of a Java method accepts `null` is
"missing" and not available to the Ceylon typechecker. I think
we've done the right thing here, but the approach we took has 
surprised a couple of people, so I guess it's well worth 
calling explicit attention to what we've done and why.

Consider the following useful method of `java.lang.String`:

<!-- lang: java -->
     public String toUpperCase(Locale locale) { ... }

By checking the implementation of this method, I determined 
that:

1. `toUpperCase()` never returns `null`, and that
2. the argument to `locale` must not be `null`.

Unfortunately, this information isn't available to the Ceylon
typechecker. So perhaps you might expect that Ceylon would take
a very heavyhanded route, treating the return type of 
`toUpperCase()` as `String?`, and forcing me to explicitly 
narrow to `String` using an assertion:

<!-- try: -->
    assert (exists uppercased = javaString.toUpperCase(locale));

In fact, this is _not_ what Ceylon does. This approach would 
make interoperation with Java a _nightmare_, resulting in code 
full of hundreds of useless assertions. You would need an 
assertion essentially _every time you call a native method_.

Worse, the "heavyhanded" approach would prevent me from passing
the value `null` as an argument to a parameter of a Java method.
What would it mean to "assert" that a method parameter accepts 
`null`? That's not an assertion that can be tested at runtime!

Nor would the "heavyhanded" approach in practice even protect 
me from `NullPointerException`s. As soon as I call native Java 
code, a `NullPointerException` can occur inside the Java code I 
call, and there's nothing Ceylon can do to protect me from that.

So instead, Ceylon takes a "lighthanded" approach at the boundary
between Java and Ceylon, letting you write this:

<!-- try: -->
    String uppercased = javaString.toUpperCase(locale);

The typechecker knows this is a Java method, and that the 
information about `null` is missing, so it assumes that you know 
what you're doing and that `toUpperCase()` never returns `null`. 

But what if you've got it wrong, and `toUpperCase()` _does_ 
return `null` at runtime? We would not want that `null` value to 
propagate into Ceylon values declared to contain a not-`null`
type!

What the Ceylon compiler does is insert a `null` check on the
return value of `toUpperCase()`, and throws a `NullPointerException`
to indicate the problem. If you ever see that `NullPointerException`,
at runtime, you're supposed to change your code to this:

<!-- try: -->
    String? uppercased = javaString.toUpperCase(locale);

This is essentially the best Ceylon can do given the information
available to it. The NPE is _not_ a bug! It's not even really a 
"gotcha".

Still, the `NullPointerException` might look like a bug to novice 
user. (Indeed, Stef recently noticed someone describe it as a bug
in a _conference presentation_.) So I'm asking myself how we can
make this less surprising. There's a range of options, including:

* add a better error message to the `NullPointerException`,
* throw an `AssertionException` instead of a `NullPointerException`, 
  or even, perhaps,
* following the approach we use for JavaScript interop, require 
  you to surround "lighthanded" code in a special construct that 
  suppresses the "heavyhanded" typechecks, `dynamic Null { ... }`
  or something.

I lean towards the first of these options, I suppose.

Whatever we do, we need to document this better. Right now, the
documentation is 
[kinda hidden](/documentation/1.0/reference/interoperability/java-from-ceylon/#calling_java_code_with_unsafe_nulls_milestone_4).
