---
title: Ranges and slices
author: Gavin King
layout: blog
unique_id: blogpage
tab: blog
tags:
---

I guess we've all seen Dijkstra's 
[famous argument](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/transcriptions/EWD08xx/EWD831.html)
that a range of natural numbers should be expressed using an 
inclusive lower bound and exclusive upper bound, and that, as 
a corollary, arrays should be indexed from 0. It's a thought 
provoking little nugget of reasoning, though it fails to 
contemplate several objections, including that:

- The inclusive lower bound/exclusive upper bound combination
  (let's call that a _Dijkstra range_) isn't natural for a 
  range which includes negative integers. The range `start<=i<=0` 
  would be written as `start<=i<1`. Dijkstra ranges are 
  nastily asymmetrical!
- Zero-based indexing is infuriatingly inconvenient when 
  accessing the last element of an array, or when indexing 
  from the end of the array. Who here loves `array[length-i-1]`?
  This inconvenience, at least arguably, outweighs the 
  convenience of being able to write `0<=i<length` instead of 
  `1<=i<length+1`, and thus substantially undermines Dijkstra's 
  case for zero-based indexing, _even if we accept his argument 
  for Dijkstra ranges!_
- Two endpoints isn't the only way to specify a range of 
  integers!

Ceylon doesn't have a traditional `for` loop, and we don't
iterate list elements by looping over the indices of the list. 
Nevertheless, we still need a way to express ranges of integers. 
Our solution to this problem is a bit different to other 
languages, and amounts to a partial rejection of Dijkstra's 
conclusions, so it's worth explaining the reasoning behind it.

## Ranges

Our design is premised on the observation that we almost never,
_in practice_, naturally find ourselves with an inclusive lower 
bound/exclusive upper bound combination. What naturally arises
in our program is almost always either:

- two (inclusive) endpoints, or
- an (inclusive) starting point and a length.

Using a Dijkstra range, we can express either case without too 
much discomfort:

- `start<=i<end+1`
- `start<=i<start+length` 

Thus, we can view the traditional use of Dijkstra ranges as a 
sort of compromise between these two cases: a choice that makes 
neither option too painful.

But, of course, by clearly distinguishing these two common 
cases, it becomes clear that both case are amenable to further 
optimization. Thus, Ceylon provides two options for expressing 
a range of integers:

- The _spanned range_ operator expresses a range in terms of 
  its two endpoints as `start..end`. In the case that `end<start`,
  the range is of _decreasing_ values. In the case that 
  `end==start`, the range has exactly one value.
- The _segmented range_ operator expresses a range in terms of
  its starting point and length as `start:length`. In the case
  of a nonpositive length, the range is empty.

Thus, a traditional C-style `for` loop of this form:

<!-- try: -->
    for (i=0; i<length; i++) { ... }

is written like this:

<!-- try: -->
    for (i in 0:length) { ... }

Now, since integers aren't the only things we can form ranges 
of, the `..` and `:` operators are generalized to any type `T` 
that satisfies the interfaces `Ordinal & Comparable<T>`. So, 
for example, we can iterate the letters of the English alphabet 
like this:

<!-- try: -->
    for (c in 'a'..'z') { ... }

## Slices

A closely related problem is that of "slicing" lists. Python 
uses Dijkstra ranges to express a slice of a list, so 
`list[start:end]` contains the elements 
`list[start], list[start+1], ..., list[end-1]`. For the 
reasons already given above, this is a reasonable compromise.

Ceylon goes one better, giving you the choice between:

- The _span_ operator, written `list[start..end]` for the 
  elements `list[start], list[start+1], ..., list[end]`.
- The _segment_ operator, written `list[start:length]` for the 
  elements `list[start], list[start+1], ..., list[start+length-1]`.

The span and segment operators are defined in terms of the
rather abstract interface `Ranged` and therefore apply to more
than just `List`s. For example, the platform module 
`ceylon.collection` lets you express subranges of a `SortedMap` 
or `SortedSet` using these operators.
