---
title: Why build your own type system?
author: Gavin King
layout: blog
unique_id: blogpage
tab: blog
tags: [ceylon-model]
---

In Ceylon 1.2 we've factored out the type system of Ceylon
as an independent module, with minimal dependencies and a
clean API. The `ceylon-model` 
[project](https://github.com/ceylon/ceylon-model/)
incorporates:

- an extensible object-oriented model of the type system in 
  Ceylon,
- algorithms for reasoning about types at compile 
  time&#x2014;or even at _runtime_ in a system with reified 
  generics&#x2014;and
- a framework for _model loading_, that is, for loading a
  model representing the types in a program or module from 
  binary artifacts, source artifacts, or anything 
  else&#x2014;this is a necessary feature for incremental 
  compilation and modularity.

Why might this be interesting to someone outside the Ceylon
team? Well, if you're thinking of creating a programming
language with nominal typing, you could consider reusing 
`ceylon-model` in your own language, saving yourself the
problem of implementing all the hairy typing algorithms that
we've already spent years getting right. That way, you can
concentrate on the stuff that's really different about your
language, that is, the syntax, the compiler backend, the
runtime semantics, and the basic language types. 

`ceylon-model` implements an _extremely_ complete type 
system, including all the following features:

- nominal typing with single-inheritance of classes and
  multiple-inheritance of interfaces,
- bounded parametric polymorphism (generics with constraints),
- sum types,
- union and intersection types, with sophisticated reasoning 
  about principal types and canonicalization,
- reasoning about subtyping,
- reasoning about coverage and disjoint types,
- principal instantiation inheritance (more powerful than 
  the single-instantiation inheritance found in other 
  languages with subtyping and generics),
- declaration-site and use-site variance,
- type constructor polymorphism (higher-kinded types),
- higher-rank / impredicative polymorphism,
- type aliases including generic type aliases,
- self types, and
- some support for overloading.

It doesn't include any functionality for type inference,
flow-sensitive typing, or pattern matching, since in Ceylon
that stuff is implemented within the typechecker, and anyway
your language probably has different rules to ours.

It seems to me that unless your type system is based on 
structural typing or dependent types, `ceylon-model` is an
awesome starting point. It might already have everything you
need, and, even if it doesn't, it provides a framework that
would let you incorporate other features into the type 
system. For example, I imagine that primitively-defined 
function, array, tuple, or record types would be easy to 
incorporate.

We're already reusing this model between the typechecker,
two compiler backends, two IDE projects, and the runtime, so 
we know its API is reasonable.

The only stumbling block is that the project is implemented 
in Java, so if you want to use it in a compiler written in a 
different language, you'll probably want to translate it to 
that language first. The code is pretty clean and 
straightforward, so that's probably not a massive hurdle to 
overcome.

The license for `ceylon-model` is Apache 2.0, so you can
basically do what you like with it. But if you decide to
use it in a project, please drop us a note, because it makes 
us happy to see people reuse our work. 