---
title: Modelling failure in Ceylon
author: Gavin King
layout: blog
unique_id: blogpage
tab: blog
tags: [error handling, exceptions]
---

In all programming languages, we need to deal with operations
than can "fail":

- a pure function might fail to produce a result, or
- an impure function might fail to produce its desired 
  side-effect (create a new file, or whatever).

In neither case can we just blindly continue with the rest 
of the computation. In the first case, the result of the
function might be the input to some other function. In the
second case, subsequent operations might assume that the
side-effect occurred (that the file now exists, or whatever).

Thus, it's clear that there must be some way for an operation
to signal failure to the calling code. There are two broad
mechanisms provided by programming languages for signalling 
failure:

1. via return values: an error code, `null`, or a sum 
   type (for example, `Option`/`Maybe` or `Either`), and
2. with some sort of exception facility.

Most modern programming languages support both of these
mechanisms, though of course the details vary. In particular,
languages offer varying degrees of typesafety. 

- In languages with proper support for sum types, return 
  values be used to model failure in a very robust and 
  typesafe way.
- In languages with some sort of _effect typing_, for example, 
  Java-style checked exceptions, the exceptions are themselves
  typesafe.

By _typesafe_ what I mean is that an operation that can fail
declares the possibility of failure in its signature, and 
the immediately calling code is forced by the compiler to 
explicitly handle the failure.

So what facilities _should_ a language offer for modelling
failure? Return codes or exceptions? Typesafe or not? To
arrive at a partial answer to this question, let's start with
the following classification of "failures":

- Some failures represent problems that the immediately 
  calling code is very unlikely to be able to recover from.
  Examples include transaction rollbacks, network failures,
  low memory conditions, or stack overflows.
- Some failures are typically the result of bugs in the
  program logic. Examples include assertion failures, 
  division by zero, and use of null pointers. This is a 
  class of failure that, as far as possible, we would like 
  to detect at compile time, but no type system will ever be
  powerful enough to detect _all_ of these failures. After a
  few minutes of thought, you should be able to convince 
  yourself this class of problems is actually a subclass of
  the first class: how can any computation possibly recover 
  meaningfully from a bug in its own logic?
- Finally, there are "failures" that often represent 
  recoverable conditions. For example, one might recover 
  from a nonexistent file by creating a file. Note that 
  failures in this class need not _always_ be recoverable.

Given this classification, I arrive relatively quickly at
the following conclusions:

- For "recoverable" conditions, the failure should be typesafe.
  Calling code should be obligated to decided what to do about
  the failure: recover from it, or transform it into an
  unrecoverable failure. The most convenient, elegant, and
  efficient way to represent this is a union-typed return
  value. For example, `JsonObject|ParseError` is a great
  way to represent the return type of a `parseJson()` function.
- For "unrecoverable" conditions, the failure should be an
  untyped (unchecked) exception. For an unrecoverable failure,
  we shouldn't be polluting the calling code with concerns it
  can't possibly do anything useful with. Unrecoverable
  problems are handled by some centralized, generic, 
  infrastructure-level error handling.

 Note: while I express no opinion on effect typing in general,
 it seems to me that this analysis provides a rather good 
 reason to think that checked exceptions aren't useful in
 languages with robust, typesafe facilities for representing
 "alternative" return values; that is, in languages with sum
 types or union types.
 
 But wait, you're probably thinking, havn't I left a huge
 question begging here?  _What about failure that don't fall
 cleanly into "recoverable" or "unrecoverable"?_ Isn't there
 a huge grey area there, filled with failures that are
 _sometimes_ recoverable by the immediately-calling code?
 
 Indeed there is. And I would say that, as a rule of thumb,
 _treat these failures as recoverable_. It's always easy for 
 the calling code to transform a recoverable failure into an
 unrecoverable failure. For example:
 
 <!-- try: -->
    assert (is JsonObject result = parseJson(json));
    //result must be a JsonObject here

Or:

 <!-- try: -->
    value result = parseJson(json);
    if (is ParseError result) {
        throw AssertionError(result.message);
    }
    //result must be a JsonObject here


That is, when in doubt, we make the calling code explicitly 
document its assumptions. Looking at this another way, we
err on the side of typesafety, since having too many unchecked
exceptions starts to undermine the whole value of the static 
type system. Finally, it's quite likely that the calling code
is better placed to produce an error with more meaningful
information than the code it's calling (though I have not
shown that in the snippets above).

I promised a "partial" answer to my original question, because 
there are still a couple of questions that I'm not sure I have
a completely bottled answer to, and there's debate over these
issues in the Ceylon community.

First, what kind of failures are legitimate uses of 
`AssertionError`? Should every `AssertionError` represent a
bug in the program? Is it reasonable for a library to 
throw an `AssertionError` when it encounters a situation it 
considers misuse of its API? Is it acceptable for generic 
exception handling code to recover from an `AssertionError`, 
or should it be considered fatal? My answers would be yes, 
yes, and yes. But perhaps that implies that it was a mistake 
to follow Java in making `AssertionError` an `Error` instead 
of a plain `Exception`.

Second, the class `Null` is a seductively convenient way to
represent failure of functions which return a value. But are
we overusing it? Would it have been better to make the return
type of `Map<Key,Item>.get()` be `Item|NoItem<Key>` instead 
of the much more generic type `Item?`?

Third, for functions with no useful return value, that is,
functions which are called only for their side-effect&mdash;where
the calling code has the option of simply ignoring any return
value representing failure&mdash;should we err on the side of 
throwing an exception? Or, alternatively, should the language
offer some way to force the caller to do _something_ with the 
return value of non-`void` function?

So, ultimately, there are some unanswered questions, and grey
areas, but it seems to me that at least we have a rather 
strong conceptual framework in which to investigate these 
problems. And it's clear that the combination of 
facilities&mdash;union types, together with unchecked 
exceptions&mdash;is a powerful foundation for robust failure 
handling. 
