---
title: Ceylon 1.2.1 is now available
author: St&#233;phane &#201;pardaud
layout: blog
unique_id: blogpage
tab: blog
tags: [release, news, progress, 1.2.1]
---

[spec]: /documentation/1.2/spec
[toolset]: /documentation/1.2/reference/tool/ceylon/subcommands/index.html
[ceylon.language]: https://herd.ceylon-lang.org/modules/ceylon.language
[sdk]: https://modules.ceylon-lang.org/categories/SDK
[ide features]: /documentation/1.2/ide/features/
[Ceylon Herd]: https://herd.ceylon-lang.org
[documentation]: /documentation/1.2
[license]: /code/licenses/
[community]: /community/
[download]: /download/
[git]: https://github.com/ceylon
[issues]: /code/issues
[Web IDE]: http://try.ceylon-lang.org
[quick-intro]: /documentation/1.2/introduction/
[OpenShift]: http://openshift.com

Three months after the last major release,
[Ceylon 1.2.1][download] is a new maintenance release, 
with almost [100 issues][] closed, including new features,
improvements and bug fixes such as:

- you can now iterate `java.lang.Iterable` values in `for` statements
  and use `java.lang.AutoCloseable` values in `try` statements,
- support for [Java 9 and Jigsaw modules](/blog/2015/12/17/java9-jigsaw),
- experimental support for [type functions][] on the JVM,
- reduced run-time dependencies for your Ceylon program,
- better interoperation with JavaScript arrays,
- better compatibility with previous and future Ceylon releases. 

Note that for the JVM backend, this release is backwards-compatible
with the previous major release (`1.2.0`), which means you can use
modules compiled with `1.2.0` on a `1.2.1` distribution out of the box.
This is not as easy the other way around, if you want to run modules
compiled for `1.2.1` on a `1.2.0` distribution, which is why we 
recommend you upgrade to `1.2.1`.

Sadly, on the JavaScript backend, we had to break binary compatibility
to fix serious interoperation issues, and so modules compiled for `1.2.1`
and `1.2.0` are not compatible. We recommend you upgrade your distribution
to `1.2.1` and recompile your modules.

[type functions]: /blog/2015/06/03/generic-function-refs/
[100 issues]: https://github.com/ceylon/ceylon/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A1.2.1+is%3Aclosed

## About Ceylon

Ceylon is a modern, modular, statically typed programming 
language for the Java and JavaScript virtual machines. The
language features a flexible and very readable syntax, a 
unique and uncommonly elegant static type system, a powerful 
module architecture, and excellent tooling, including an 
awesome Eclipse-based IDE.

Ceylon enables the development of cross-platform modules 
that execute portably in both virtual machine environments. 
Alternatively, a Ceylon module may target one or the other 
platform, in which case it may interoperate with native code 
written for that platform.

## In the box

[This release][download] includes:

- a complete [language specification][spec] that defines the 
  syntax and semantics of Ceylon in language accessible to 
  the professional developer,
- a [command line toolset][toolset] including compilers for 
  Java and JavaScript, a documentation compiler, a test 
  runner, a WAR archive packager, and support for executing 
  modular programs on the JVM and Node.js,
- a powerful module architecture for code organization,
  dependency management, and module isolation at runtime,
- the [language module][ceylon.language], our minimal, 
  cross-platform foundation of the [Ceylon SDK][sdk], and
- a [full-featured][ide features] Eclipse-based integrated 
  development environment.

## Language

Ceylon is a highly understandable object-oriented language 
with static typing. The language features:

- an emphasis upon __readability__ and a strong bias toward 
  __omission or elimination of potentially-harmful or 
  potentially-ambiguous constructs__ and toward highly 
  __disciplined use of static types__,
- an extremely powerful and uncommonly elegant type system 
  combining subtype and parametric polymorphism with:
  - first-class __union and intersection types__, 
  - both __declaration-site and use-site variance__, and
  - the use of principal types for __local type inference__ 
    and __flow-sensitive typing__,
- a unique treatment of __function and tuple types__, 
  enabling powerful abstractions, along with the most 
  __elegant approach to `null`__ of any modern language, 
- first-class constructs for defining __modules and 
  dependencies between modules__,
- a very flexible syntax including __comprehensions__ and 
  support for expressing __tree-like structures__,
- __fully-reified generic types__, on both the JVM and
  JavaScript virtual machines, and a unique __typesafe 
  metamodel__.

More information about these language features may be
found in the [feature list](/features) and 
[quick introduction][quick-intro].

## IDE

Ceylon IDE now features the following improvements, along
with many bugfixes and a number of performance enhancements:

- improved documentation hover,
- better UI responsiveness,
- support running on Java 9.

A number of important subsystems have been abstracted and
rewritten in Ceylon, to support the ongoing development of
the new IntelliJ-based IDE for Ceylon.

## SDK

The [platform modules][sdk], recompiled for 1.2.1, are 
available in the shared community repository, [Ceylon Herd][].

This release introduces several new platform modules:

- `ceylon.numeric` is a cross-platform module containing math
operations for `Integer` and `Float`. In time it will replace parts of
the JVM-only `ceylon.math` module.
- `ceylon.decimal` is a JVM-only module (but soon to be cross-platform) 
containing arbitrary-length decimal support. In time it will replace parts of
the JVM-only `ceylon.math` module.
- `ceylon.whole` is a cross-platform module containing arbitrary-length
integer support. In time it will replace parts of
the JVM-only `ceylon.math` module.
- `ceylon.random` is a cross-platform module containing random number
generators. In time it will replace parts of
the JVM-only `ceylon.math` module.
- `ceylon.interop.browser` contains JavaScript-only interoperation
functions and types for the DOM, HTML and `XMLHttpRequest`.

Along with several API enhancements and bugfixes, including:

- Many new features for `ceylon.test`, the Ceylon Test Suite.
- Performance improvement of the `ceylon.json` parser.

## Web IDE

You can try Ceylon using the [Web IDE][], featuring syntax highlighting, 
interactive error reporting, autocompletion, online 
documentation, and persistence and code sharing via Gist.

The Web IDE serves a dual purpose as a standard example
demonstrating the use of Ceylon for web application 
development and deployment to the [OpenShift][] cloud 
platform.

## Community

The Ceylon community site, <http://ceylon-lang.org>, includes 
[documentation][], and information about 
[getting involved][community].

## Source code

The source code for Ceylon, its specification, and its website,
is freely available from [GitHub][git].

Information about Ceylon's open source licenses is available 
[here][license].

## Issues

Bugs and suggestions may be reported in GitHub's 
[issue tracker][issues].

## Migrating from Ceylon 1.2.0

Migration from Ceylon 1.2.0 is easy. To recompile a module for 
1.2.1:

- First ensure that its dependencies have also been 
  recompiled.
- If it imports a Ceylon SDK platform module, upgrade the 
  version number specified by the module `import` statement 
  from `"1.2.0"` to `"1.2.1"` .
- If it was compiled against Ceylon `1.2.0` you should still
  be able to use it in `1.2.1` for the JVM backend,
  as it is backwards-compatible. Sadly, this is not the case
  for the JavaScript backend, and so you will need to recompile
  your modules with `1.2.1`.

## Acknowledgement

As always, we're deeply grateful to the community volunteers 
who contributed a substantial part of the current Ceylon 
codebase, working in their own spare time. The following 
people have contributed to Ceylon:

Gavin King, Stéphane Épardaud, Tako Schotanus, Tom Bentley,
David Festal, Enrique Zamudio, Bastien Jansen, 
Emmanuel Bernard, Aleš Justin, Tomáš Hradec, James Cobb, 
Ross Tate, Max Rydahl Andersen, Mladen Turk, 
Lucas Werkmeister, Roland Tepp, Diego Coronel, Matej Lazar, 
John Vasileff, Toby Crawley, Julien Viet, Loic Rouchon, 
Stephane Gallès, Ivo Kasiuk, Corbin Uselton, Paco Soberón,
Michael Musgrove, Daniel Rochetti, Henning Burdack, 
Luke deGruchy, Rohit Mohan, Griffin DeJohn, Casey Dahlin, 
Alexander Altman, Alexander Zolotko, Alex Szczuczko, 
Andrés G. Aragoneses, Anh Nhan Nguyen, Brice Dutheil, 
Carlos Augusto Mar, Charles Gould, Chris Gregory, klinger, 
Martin Voelkle, Mr. Arkansas, Paŭlo Ebermann, Vorlent, 
Akber Choudhry, Renato Athaydes, Flavio Oliveri, 
Michael Brackx, Brent Douglas, Lukas Eder, Markus Rydh, 
Julien Ponge, Pete Muir, Nicolas Leroux, Brett Cannon, 
Geoffrey De Smet, Guillaume Lours, Gunnar Morling, 
Jeff Parsons, Jesse Sightler, Oleg Kulikov, Raimund Klein, 
Sergej Koščejev, Chris Marshall, Simon Thum, Maia Kozheva, 
Shelby, Aslak Knutsen, Fabien Meurisse, Sjur Bakka, 
Xavier Coulon, Ari Kast, Dan Allen, Deniz Türkoglu, 
F. Meurisse, Jean-Charles Roger, Johannes Lehmann, allentc, 
Nikolay Tsankov, Chris Horne, Gabriel Mirea, Georg Ragaller, 
Harald Wellmann, klinger, Oliver Gondža, Stephen Crawley,
Byron Clark, Francisco Reverbel, Jonas Berlin, Luke Hutchison,
Nikita Ostroumov, Santiago Rodriguez, Sean Flanigan.
